# Assessment of DAISIE as a model to analyze the present species diversity of Treeshrews (Order Scandentia).
Cornelius Nichodemus & Eric Brown

Treeshrews (Order Scandentia) have evolved wholly within Southeast and South Asia over the past 50 - 60 million years. In this time, the Indian subcontinent collided with mainland Asia and the Sundaland landmass that consists today of much of the Malay archipeligo west of Sulawesi continuously morphed in size and connectivity with the Southeast Asian mainland. Especially in the last several million years, glaciation events have routinely connected and isolated various islands from the mainland in Southeast Asia. Treeshrews diversified in this 50-odd million years, and the 20 described species currently range from India in the west to the Philippines in the east, and southern China south through western islands in the Malay archipelago. Many of these species consist of multiple subspecies that are commonly differentiated by color morph and/or geographic connectivity. Very little genotyping of these species or subspecies has been accomplished, and little is known about the life histories of most of them. Consequently the Scandentia phylogeny is still contested, though most of the order seems to have been established by at least 5 million years ago ([Roberts et al. - 2011 - Molecular phylogeny of treeshrews (Mammalia Scand.pdf](https://github.com/ebrownrma/final-project/files/10186891/Roberts.et.al.-.2011.-.Molecular.phylogeny.of.treeshrews.Mammalia.Scand.pdf)). As many islands in the Malay archipelago have become isolated since the Pleistocene glaciations, the dozens of subspecies may be legitimate species. Equally unknown is the number of populations, subspecies, and/or species that have gone extinct from Scandentia. **We are curious as to whether biogeographic modeling can direct arguments about species diversity, accounting for low geographic connectivity in the past 5 million years and whether dozens of subspecies constitute legitimate speciation events.**

Traditional island biogeography describes equilibrium in species diversity on an island as a function of immigration, extinction, and speciation balancing over time, dependent largely on island size and isolation. Recent arguments claim that this glosses over variation between mechanism rates, particularly on considerably isolated islands where immigration rate is much slower than less isolated islands and consequently speciation rates are likely to be more critical to diversity equilibria ([Ecology Letters - 2015 - Valente - Equilibrium and non‐equilibrium dynamics simultaneously operate in the Gal pagos islands.pdf](https://github.com/ebrownrma/final-project/files/10187230/Ecology.Letters.-.2015.-.Valente.-.Equilibrium.and.non.equilibrium.dynamics.simultaneously.operate.in.the.Gal.pagos.islands.pdf)). Also important to consider here are taxa-specific rates of immigration, as some taxa (e.g. birds) are less limited by geographic connnectivity than others (e.g. small mammals). Islands within larger island systems such as the Malay archipelago could be considered isolated for taxa such as treeshrews. Recently proposed phylogenies of Scandentia suggest little diversification within the past 10 million years at the species level. **We evaluated the biogeographic model DAISIE as described by Valente et al. (2019) to determine whether the variables at play in biogeographic processes (immigration, extinction, and speciation) provide clarification for why recently proposed phylogenies take the form that they do.** The results of a test of equilibrium may also provide insight as to how we might expect current subspecies designations to contribute to the equilibrium of the order in select regions of its range. 

Some limitations of DAISIE and the full extent of the question of Treeshrew diversity stick out, though, especially since the order spans much further than an island or archipelago of islands, which is specifically what DAISIE looks at. First, it may therefore be more practical to approach the question of equilibrium either by island (e.g. investigate the equilibrium of treeshrews on Borneo which contains many endemics) or by island system (e.g. only look at those species/subspecies outside of mainland Asia). Many small islands exist which also possess treeshrew species, so it may be more practical to limit analysis to larger islands (e.g. Borneo, Sumatra, and major Philippine islands) or omit many of the smaller islands in a multi-island analysis. Second, it may be useful here to investigate other dispersal barriers for treeshrews, as their ranges are geographically limited, even within mainland Asia. Within a range selection for species / populations that can be considered isolated, DAISIE accounts for a number of scenarios for species found within an "archipelago" (DAISIE terms both single islands and island systems as "archipelagos"), including those that aren't differentiated from a mainland counterpart, those that speciated _in situ_, and those that diverged directly from a mainland parent. 

Despite some potential limitations, with a phylogenetic dataset as in Roberts et al. 2011, predictions could be made with DAISIE about the rates of extinction, immigration, and speciation of Scandentia. Even though much of the range may not be considered isolated in a traditional sense, the model could still be run, but we might expect that immigration has had a much more considerable influence on the equilibration of diversity in Scandentia than speciation. **To test this, we might run DAISIE with available phylogenetic data, manipulating the necessary parameters to better account for the relatively well-connected treeshrew range.**

Before drawing conclusions from such a model, it may be useful to also investigate models that specifically task themselves with mainland diversification mechanisms. Much of the history of Scandentia occurred within a connected Sunda Shelf (SE Asia and the western Malay islands: [hall_2001_SE Asia-W Pacific land and sea_WIC.pdf](https://github.com/ebrownrma/final-project/files/10200668/hall_2001_SE.Asia-W.Pacific.land.and.sea_WIC.pdf)), so their diversification may better be explained outside of the theory of island biogeography. 

Just like other models, DAISIE model could be applicable to other biological systems such as plants found on islands or archipelago (island systems). The variables at play in DAISIE model could explicitly demonstrate species' diversification rates and make predictions of immigration and extinction under such conditions.
